The datasets in these projects are all in the DATA folder

Three data files from two datasets, we will do both the mid-term project
and the final project based on these datasets. Extra points (10% of total)
for any insights outside of the questions asked.  All code submitted must contain
annotations throughout, so if the code were stripped away, it will tell "a story"
of what the program does and how it is designed. Should not be big essays, short
comments, interspersed in the code) and the answers should be separately presented
in a document. 

Midterm

Dataset 1:  train.csv.gz
This is hand-written digits (0-9) from many people.
It contains 785 columns, first columns is digit and the 784 remaining columns
  are pixels 0-783. These are essentially 28x28 squares, so you can map the 784
  columns to entries in the squares. Each entry is 0-255, 0 is for black and 255
  stands for white, numbers in between are shades of gray

1) Read in the data and convert the pixel data into pictures using plot
   show a few examples in your report along with the code
   
2)  Separate the data by digits, and calculate average value of each pixel,
   a)  Plot the average values, does it still resemble the digit label ?
   b) which digits fare the best under this operation ?

3) Find which columns have the most variance and which have the least.
   a) Over the whole dataset and then separately, for each digit (0-9)
   b) Can you connect the variance to the results in 2b ?
   c) Does replacing the columns with the lowest variability by their average
        value have an effect on the digits ?
   d) How many columns have average values close to 255 or 0  and why ?

4) On a graph paper (you can print your own at https://print-graph-paper.com),
   mark off 28 x 28 squares, write the digits (0-9) in these squares and "digitize"
   them, essentially add lines corresponding to your own handwriting to this set
   You should present a program that prints out digits in your handwriting.
   If you are ambitious, create a program to print your signature (not a
   statistic question, no bonus points for this)

Dataset 2: a) Mnemiopsis_col_data.csv b) Mnemiopsis_count_data.csv

This is gene expression data,  The columns represent samples, whose information is
in the col_data file. The count_data file contains counts for each gene (rows).
The file, info_gene.txt contains information about the organism and some links to
look up gene functions. It will be a good experience to learn to use the genome resources,
as this is the kind of struggles most researchers go through when they start looking at genes.

1) What are the top 5 genes with the highest average expression
  (across experiments)  in the set ? what is their function ?

2) Are the top 5 genes different if they are done on a per column basis ?

3) Calculate mean and standard deviation of each column
    If the mean is different, then scale the columns so that they all have
      the same mean for the subsequent questions
3) Use correlations between columns to find the samples that are closely
    related. Is this concordant with the column labels ?

4) Use correlations between rows to find the closest pairs (top 5)
   Are these close because they vary a lot between the groups or are they close because they don't vary much ?

5) If you were forced to divide the genes in each column into high, medium and
low count genes, how would you do this based on the data that you have ?

6) make a list of the top 5 genes with most variability and top 5 genes with
least variability (exclude genes that have low expression values)

7) Using the labels of columns provided, find the top variable genes between
the two groups using a t-test list the 5 most up regulated and
  5 most  down regulated genes. What happens if you rank by p-value of the t-test ?
  would you exclude some of these  genes for having low expression ?


Final Project:


For dataset 1

1) Use PCA to reduce dimensions.  How many components do you need to keep
to reproduce the digits reasonably well ? what is your final matrix ?

2) Draw a tree of the pixels, and see if you can explain the results based on
geometry of the pixels (how far apart are they in the 2-d space).
Try to Explain the PCA results in light of this. 

3) Can you use some of the tools you have learnt to build a classifier,
so if you get a new set of pixels you can predict what is in the
picture. This is a the start of a real project, but you don't have all the tools
 (such as neural networks) which might be more suited for this task.
Split your dataset into two (a training set and a test set),
build your classifier and figure out
how well it does with the test data in predicting the digits. 
Define the sensitivity and specificity of your classifier. How well does it recognize your own handwriting (make sure your handwriting is not in the training set)

For dataset 2

1) Build hierarchical trees based on the columns and for the rows (exclude rows
that are "low" expression)

2) Draw a heat map of the expression data

3) Use DESeq2 to analyse this data
   a) which are the most significantly changing genes in this dataset ?
   b) which genes are most consistently highly expressed in these datasets
       they are the "house-keeping" genes
   c) How consistent are these results with the analysis you did
      in the midterm project ? 
   d) What else can you say about the data in terms of consistency,
   and the results that you find from your analyses. The question is open-ended,
   think of this as your experiment, you need to write a paper based on this data
   so you have to figure out what kind of "story" you can tell based on this.
   
   e) what is the most interesting pathway or gene that is responding in this study ?
   
